---
description: Drey's decentralised actuarial operating system explained.
---

# Architecture I

## Actuarial Operating System

Drey Finance's Actuarial Operating System is a unique, decentralized system that facilitates the operation of actuarial models and collaborative computations over the [Nostr protocol](https://nostr.com/) with data permanence and immutability courtesy of the [Bitcoin blockchain](https://bitcoin.org/en/). It fundamentally serves as a mechanism for the management and execution of actuarial tasks, leveraging the benefits of blockchain technology - such as transparency, immutability, and decentralization - to enhance the accuracy and reliability of actuarial operations. The Drey Finance Actuarial Operating System is designed to enable the calculation of life expectancy, risk management, and financial forecasting in a decentralized manner. It employs Bitcoin's blockchain as a universal ledger, storing actuarial models, payout schedules, source code, proposals, and vote records, thereby ensuring the longevity of data immutability, durability, transparency, trust and accessibility​​.

Importantly, Drey Finance's Actuarial Operating System is **not** a blockchain or Layer-2 protocol. While it leverages the Bitcoin blockchain and the [Stacks network](https://stacks.co) for its functionality, it does not constitute a separate blockchain or protocol in its own right. Instead, it operates within the existing Bitcoin and Stacks infrastructure, using these systems as a basis to carry out its specialized actuarial functions. It does not possess its own consensus mechanism, but instead uses the consensus mechanisms inherent in Bitcoin and Stacks to secure its operations. This ensures that it maintains the high level of security and decentralization associated with these established networks, while still facilitating the unique operations necessary for actuarial computations.

The Actuarial Operating System is an innovative application of blockchain technology to the field of actuarial science. Its design and function reflect the potential for blockchain technology to revolutionize industries beyond finance, including insurance and risk management. By operating within the established infrastructure of Bitcoin and Stacks, it is able to leverage the benefits of these systems while avoiding the complexities and risks associated with creating a new blockchain or protocol. This approach not only enhances the reliability and security of actuarial operations but also demonstrates the potential for Bitcoin's blockchain technology to be used as a foundation for a wide range of applications, extending far beyond its original use as a digital currency.

## Bitcoin's Universal Ledger

The advent of [Taproot-type](https://trustmachines.co/learn/bitcoin-taproot-upgrade-basic-breakdown/) transactions has ushered in a new era for the Bitcoin Blockchain, fundamentally transforming its capabilities. Previously, the Bitcoin network was primarily used as a decentralized digital currency, with its data format being somewhat limited. However, with Taproot-type transactions, it is now possible to embed any type of data into the Bitcoin Blockchain. This means that the Bitcoin network can now serve as a universal ledger, capable of storing a wide variety of data types, not just transactional information. This opens up a plethora of new possibilities for developers and users alike, extending the utility of the Bitcoin network beyond its original purpose.

Once data is embedded into the Bitcoin Blockchain via a Taproot-type transaction, it becomes a permanent fixture on the network. This permanence is a key feature of the Bitcoin network, ensuring that once data is added to the blockchain, it cannot be altered or removed. This immutability provides a robust level of security and trust, as users can be confident that the data they see on the blockchain is accurate and has not been tampered with. This feature is particularly valuable in applications where data integrity is paramount, such as in legal contracts, property deeds, academic records, and actuarial operations.

In addition to permanence, data embedded into the Bitcoin Blockchain via Taproot-type transactions also inherits other key features of the Bitcoin network, such as availability and determinism. Availability ensures that the data is always accessible to anyone on the network, regardless of their geographical location or the time of day. This global accessibility is a cornerstone of the decentralized nature of the Bitcoin network. Determinism, on the other hand, ensures that the outcome of any transaction is predictable and consistent, regardless of when or where it is executed. This feature is crucial for the reliable operation of smart contracts and other automated processes on the blockchain. Together, these features make the Bitcoin network a powerful platform for a wide range of applications, far beyond its original use as a digital currency.

As described in following sections, Drey Finance leverages Bitcoin as a universal ledger, storing actuarial models, payout schedules, source code, proposals and vote records and more inside the Bitcoin blockchain. Bitcoin's features of data permanence, accessibility and determinism are unmatched by other distributed storage models available. By undertaking the goal of decentralizing actuarial operations, Drey Finance itself is held to a higher standards where longevity of data immutability, durability and accessibility will be measured across lifetimes. We believe Bitcoin as a universal ledger enables this vision to become reality.

## Stacks

[Stacks](https://www.stacks.co/) is a comprehensive platform that extends the functionality of Bitcoin to enable decentralized applications (dApps) and smart contracts. It is designed to leverage the security and capital of Bitcoin while adding new features and capabilities. Here's a summary of the key components and features of Stacks:

1. **Stacks Blockchain**: Stacks is a layer on top of Bitcoin, linked by a consensus mechanism called Proof of Transfer (PoX). This allows Stacks to inherit Bitcoin's security and enables Stacks apps to use Bitcoin's state. Stacks is an open network with contributions from individuals and companies worldwide.
2. **Decentralized Apps (dApps)**: Stacks powers decentralized apps that run on the Stacks blockchain instead of a centralized server. This opens up new use cases that were not possible before.
3. **Clarity Smart Contracts**: Clarity is a smart contract language designed to prevent bugs and common exploits, thereby protecting users. Smart contracts are the logic behind decentralized apps.
4. **Proof of Transfer (PoX)**: PoX is the consensus mechanism that links Bitcoin and Stacks. It recycles Bitcoin's Proof of Work to achieve high levels of decentralization and scalability without additional environmental impact.
5. **Stacking**: Stacking is a mechanism that allows holders of Stacks Token to earn Bitcoin. By locking up STX tokens on the network, users provide valuable security benefits to the network and earn a Bitcoin yield as a reward.
6. **sBTC**: sBTC functionality allows Bitcoin to become a fully programmable, productive asset. It enables the creation of applications and experiences, such as DeFi and NFTs, backed by the security and stability of Bitcoin using a novel Bitcoin peg mechanism.
7. **Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs)**: Stacks supports the creation of NFTs on the Bitcoin network. These unique tokens can represent ownership of a unique item or piece of content.
8. **Decentralized Finance (DeFi)**: Stacks enables true Bitcoin DeFi, given Stacks contracts' visibility into the Bitcoin state and Stacks’ inherent ability to leverage Bitcoin’s security and settlement assurances.
9. **Blockchain Naming System (BNS)**: BNS is a network system that binds Stacks usernames to off-chain state without relying on any central points of control.
10. **STX Token**: The Stacks token (STX) is used for executing smart contracts on the Stacks network. It also plays a key role in incentivizing open mining.

The Stacks ecosystem is vast and offers a wide range of features and possibilities for developers and users alike. It aims to build a better internet on Bitcoin, providing a platform for decentralized apps and smart contracts, while leveraging the security and robustness of the Bitcoin network.

### sBTC

The white paper titled "[sBTC: Design of a Trustless Two-way Peg for Bitcoin](https://stacks-network.github.io/stacks/sbtc.pdf)" discusses a novel decentralized Bitcoin peg mechanism. This mechanism allows for the issuance of a BTC-pegged asset on Bitcoin layers that is 1:1 pegged to BTC and does not rely on centralized or predetermined actors for its functionality. Instead, the peg mechanism operates in a decentralized manner using an open-membership group of dynamic actors that are economically incentivized and can start or stop contributing to the peg functionality.

The paper highlights the unique properties of the sBTC peg design, such as its open and decentralized nature, censorship resistance, cheap peg in/out, on-chain Bitcoin oracle, Bitcoin security, and commercial viability. The design allows for easy movement of BTC in and out of layers, and also allows smart contracts on the layers to write to Bitcoin in a trustless way. This Bitcoin write functionality is a major unlock for developers enabling them to build smart contracts that can programmatically send BTC to Bitcoin addresses through the decentralized peg.

The sBTC system is designed to be incentive-compatible with mining on the canonical Stacks fork, and to ensure that Stackers' most profitable course of action is always to faithfully maintain the peg. The system has two modes of operation: the Normal Mode, and the Recovery Mode. In Normal Mode, users send BTC to a peg wallet/script on the Bitcoin chain that is controlled by a threshold fraction of stackers, maintaining a 1:1 peg. If the Normal mode encounters a liveness failure for any reason, the system transitions to a Recovery Mode until enough stackers come back online to resume signing peg-out requests.

The paper also discusses the design details of sBTC, including the Threshold Signature Wallet, sBTC Circulating Supply, and the interaction with the PoX consensus algorithm. The sBTC design is commercially viable because it can scale to a sBTC circulating supply of hundreds of millions of dollars worth of BTC today and potentially to tens of billions of dollars worth of sBTC circulating supply in the future. The upper limit on sBTC supply is determined by a configurable parameter called the Liveness Ratio and is tied to the economic size of STX capital locked.

Drey Finance utilizes Stacks and sBTC to peg-in Drey Finance deposits to the Stacks blockchain. Once there, Drey Actuaries can process distributions to customers rapidly in an automated fashion using [Clarity language based smart contracts](https://docs.stacks.co/docs/clarity/), secured by a supermajority of Drey Actuaries operation a [Schnorr based threshold signature scheme](https://eprint.iacr.org/2022/550).

